HUMAN BEINGS SPEND A
GREAT DEAL OF TIME
THINKING ABOUT HOW
TO FEED THEMSELVES.
BUT HAVE THEY GIVEN
ENOUGH THOUGHT
TO THE WAY IN
WHICH THEY DO SO?
HAVE THEY REFLECTED ON
THE CAUSES FOR WHICH
SOME CONSUME TOO
MUCH WHILE OTHERS
BARELY HAVE ENOUGH TO
COVER THEIR BASIC NEEDS,
RISKING DEATH
BY STARVATION?
THIS CLIENT OF A FAST
FOOD RESTAURANT IS
DEVOURING A CHEESEBURGER
FILLED WITH KETCHUP,
SIDE OF FRENCH FRIES,
AND A SUGARY SOFT DRINK.
AN IMAGE MOST OF
US IDENTIFY WITH.
IN DEVELOPED NATIONS
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
DIE EVERY YEAR
DUE TO NUTRITION
RELATED DISEASES.
AT THE SAME TIME THREE
QUARTERS OF THE POPULATION
OF THE WORLD ARE BUSY
TRYING TO SURVIVE HUNGER.
HALF OF ALL FEMALE
EUROPEAN TEENAGERS ADMIT
TO HAVING BEEN ON A DIET AT
SOME POINT DURING THE YEAR.
IN THE UNITED STATES
OBESITY AFFLICTS
A THIRD OF
THE POPULATION
AND KILLS THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE EACH YEAR.
IN THE MEANTIME, 850
MILLION HUMAN BEINGS
GO HUNGRY EVERY DAY.
HUNGER IS THE MOST EXTREME
RAMIFICATION OF POVERTY.
IT IS ALSO A VIOLATION
OF THE MOST BASIC OF
HUMAN RIGHTS, THE RIGHT
TO SUFFICIENT FOOD.
HUNGER IS A
MORAL BLIGHT
BUT IT IS ALSO AN
ECONOMIC HANDICAP.
A HUNGRY POPULACE CANNOT
WORK AT FULL CAPACITY.
IT IS PERENNIALLY SICK AND
CANNOT THINK STRAIGHT.
WITH HUNGER,
PRODUCTIVITY DECLINES,
NATIONS CANNOT PROSPER,
AND THE SUSTAINABLE USE
OF NATURAL RESOURCES
IS COMPROMISED.
HUNGER IS AT
THE SAME TIME
A CAUSE AND AN
EFFECT OF POVERTY.
TOWARDS THE END OF
THE 20TH CENTURY,
THE WORLD SUMMIT
ON NUTRITION
ESTABLISHED A GOAL
OF REDUCING BY HALF
THE NUMBER OF HUNGRY
PEOPLE IN THE WORLD.
THE DEADLINE THEY AGREED
ON WAS THE YEAR 2015.
SOME TIME LATER THE
MILLENNIUM DECLARATION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS
SET THE SAME OBJECTIVE
ALONG WITH
ANOTHER SEVEN
MOST OF WHICH WERE RELATED
TO REDUCTION OF HUNGER
AND POVERTY, TO
IMPROVE THE HEALTH OF
CHILD REARING MOTHERS,
TO REDUCE INFANT MORTALITY,
AND TO GUARANTEE THE
HEALTH OF THE ENVIRONMENT.
WE ARE FAST APPROACHING
THIS DEADLINE
AND WE CAN ALREADY
DRAW SOME CONCLUSIONS.
SOME COUNTRIES HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO EFFECTIVELY
REDUCE HUNGER, BUT MOST
ARE FAILING MISERABLY.
THE PROJECTS THAT HAVE
BEEN SET IN MOTION
IN LATIN
AMERICA AND ASIA
HAVE PRODUCED MODEST
RESULTS AT BEST.
COUNTRIES SUCH AS CHINA
AND VIETNAM HAVE, HOWEVER,
IMPROVED THEIR
SITUATION DRASTICALLY.
IN SUB-SAHARAN
AFRICA, HOWEVER,
HUNGER IS
ON THE RISE.
ONE OUT OF EVERY FOUR
UNDERNOURISHED PERSONS
ON THE PLANET IS
FROM THIS REGION.
THE FIGHT AGAINST HUNGER
BEGAN AFTER WORLD WAR II
WITH THE SO CALLED
"GREEN REVOLUTION".
SINCE THEN FOOD PRODUCTION
HAS ALWAYS BEEN GREATER
THAN POPULATION GROWTH.
WE ARE NOW ABLE TO
PRODUCE ENOUGH CALORIES
TO FEED THE
ENTIRE PLANET...
THEY JUST HAVE TO BE
PROPERLY DISTRIBUTED.
THIS INCREASE IN
PRODUCTION WAS ACHIEVED
BY INCREASING THE
PRODUCTIVITY OF FARMLANDS.
NEW VARIETIES OF WHEAT,
RICE AND CORN
WERE DEVELOPED AND
RESULTS WERE SPECTACULAR.
THE SUB-SAHARAN REGION
OF AFRICA IS THE ONLY
PLACE ON EARTH THAT
HAS NOT BENEFITED
FROM THE GREEN
REVOLUTION.
AFRICA DOES NOT HAVE
QUALITY INFRASTRUCTURE,
THERE ARE NO DECENT ROADS
OR PORTS, AND INTERNAL
MARKETS ARE IRRELEVANT
TO THE WORLD ECONOMY.
EXTERNAL DEBTS DROWN
THE POPULATION
IN EVER MORE MISERY.
QUALIFIED LABOR IS BEING
DRAINED FROM THE COUNTRY.
AGRICULTURE IS PRIMITIVE
AND INTENSIVE AGRICULTURAL
PROJECTS HAVE FAILED
DUE TO POOR EXECUTION.
IT'S NO WONDER
THAT AFRICA BOASTS
THE WORST STATISTICS
IN THE WORLD.
IN THE MEANTIME, ASIA
HAS HAD MIXED RESULTS
IN ITS FIGHT
AGAINST HUNGER.
WHILE CHINA AND VIETNAM
ARE FAST APPROACHING
2015 OBJECTIVES,
NORTH KOREA, PAKISTAN
AND BANGLADESH MORE
CLOSELY RESEMBLE
SOME OF THE POOREST
COUNTRIES IN AFRICA.
THE MAJOR CITIES IN THESE
COUNTRIES CONTINUE TO
SUFFER FROM THE EFFECT OF
A MASSIVE RURAL EXODUS.
COUNTRIES SUCH AS
CHINA AND VIETNAM
HAVE HAD SUCCESS
BECAUSE THEY HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO CREATE A
DYNAMIC RURAL ECONOMY.
MOST PEOPLE WHO ARE
STARVING LIVE IN
RURAL AREAS AND IT
IS IN THESE AREAS
WHERE SOLUTIONS
MUST BE FOUND.
IN BOTH CASES, THESE
COUNTRIES INVESTED HEAVILY
IN RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE,
PROVIDED ACCESS TO LAND,
AND RAISED THE PRICES OF
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS.
MARKETS WERE THUS
JUMP-STARTED AND THE
BUYING POWER OF FARMERS
INCREASED ACCORDINGLY.
THE END RESULT IS THAT
IN CHINA AND VIETNAM
STARVATION HAS
BEEN CUT IN HALF.
NOTWITHSTANDING PROGRESS
IN PARTS OF ASIA,
WE ARE VERY FAR
FROM REACHING THE
MILLENNIUM OBJECTIVES
THAT PERTAIN TO NUTRITION.
MORE THAN HALF OF THE 11
MILLION CHILDREN THAT DIE
EACH YEAR DO SO BECAUSE
THEY'RE MALNOURISHED.
WHAT'S MORE, TWO BILLION
PEOPLE IN THE WORLD
ARE ANEMIC.
OF THOSE, HALF ARE
PREGNANT WOMEN.
AND OF THE REST,
MOST ARE CHILDREN
UNDER THE AGE OF FIVE.
THE CORRELATION BETWEEN
LOW BIRTH WEIGHT
AND HIGH INFANT MORTALITY
RATES IS WELL KNOWN.
NEWBORNS WEIGHING LESS
THAN TWO AND A HALF KILOS
ARE MORE
PROBABLE TO DIE
DURING THEIR
FIRST FEW MONTHS.
WHAT'S MORE, THE
PERIOD IN WHICH BABIES
ARE MOST AT RISK
OF MALNOURISHMENT
COINCIDES WITH THEIR
NATURAL LACTATION PERIOD.
THE SCARCITY OF NUTRIENTS
FROM MALNOURISHED MOTHERS
RESULTS IN A LACK
OF SUFFICIENT MILK,
WHICH IS USUALLY OF
LOW NUTRITIONAL VALUE.
THIS IS A CONSTANT PROBLEM
OF THE POOREST STRATA
OF HUMAN POPULATIONS.
WOMEN ARE THE
MAIN BREADWINNERS
IN RURAL SOCIETIES.
THEY PRODUCE
FOOD PRODUCTS,
KEEP THE
HOUSEHOLD STOCKED,
AND PREPARE THE MEALS
TO FEED THEIR FAMILIES.
EVEN THE POOREST WOMEN ARE
EXTREMELY KNOWLEDGEABLE
ABOUT THE USE OF
NATURAL RESOURCES.
THE MALNOURISHMENT OF
WOMEN IS THEREFORE
MUCH MORE DRAMATIC.
WITHOUT ACTIVE,
WELL-NOURISHED WOMEN
IN SOCIETY, NOT
ONLY THE PRESENT
BUT THE FUTURE WILL
BE SEVERELY IMPAIRED.
MALNOURISHMENT IS
ESPECIALLY NOTICEABLE
IN THE SAHEL FRINGE
WHERE THE SAHARA DESERT
FUSES WITH THE
AFRICAN SAVANNAH.
CLIMATE CHANGE IS
RAPIDLY INCREASING
THE SIZE OF THE DESERT.
THE DRY SEASONS ARE
BECOMING LONGER.
IN RECENT YEARS THE
NOMADIC PEOPLE OF NIGER
HAVE LOST MORE THAN
HALF THEIR CATTLE.
BECAUSE OF THIS, FAMILIES
HAVE CHANGED THEIR
EATING HABITS AND NOW
EAT ONLY ONCE A DAY.
MANY PEOPLE CONSUME
ONLY PLANTS AND LEAVES.
INTERESTINGLY
ENOUGH, THOUGH,
BECAUSE OF THE MANY
ANIMALS THAT HAVE DIED
MORE MEAT IS
SIMULTANEOUSLY CONSUMED.
BUT THIS WILL NOT
LAST TOO LONG.
THE DRYING OF WELLS
HAS MADE IT NECESSARY
FOR THOSE WHO LIVE BY
NOMADIC SHEPHERDING
TO DO SO IN
AGRARIAN AREAS.
MANY YEARS AGO THE
FRINGE BETWEEN THE DESERT
AND ARABLE LAND WAS
WIDE ENOUGH TO CREATE
A KIND OF
BUFFER ZONE.
NOWADAYS THAT
FRINGE IS SO NARROW
THAT CONFLICTS
ARE FLOURISHING.
THEIR MAIN PROBLEM
IS THAT WHAT THEY SELL
HAS BECOME CHEAPER AND WHAT
THEY BUY IS TOO EXPENSIVE.
ANIMAL PRICES
ARE VERY LOW.
IN THE LAST TWO YEARS
THE PRICE OF A COW
HAS BEEN CUT IN HALF.
ON THE OTHER HAND, THE
PRICE OF MIHO SEED
AND SORGO HAS DOUBLED.
MORE AND MORE NOMADS
VIEW THE MAJOR CITIES
AS THE ONLY ANSWER
TO THEIR PROBLEMS.
THIS CRISIS CANNOT
BE SOLVED ONLY BY
INCREASING THE
AVAILABILITY OF FOOD.
THE CRISIS OF
NOURISHMENT IN SAHEL
AFFECTS EIGHT
MILLION PEOPLE.
SCIENTIFIC STUDIES CONFIRM
THAT THE PROBLEM OF
MALNUTRITION IS NOT DUE TO
A LACK OF FOOD, BUT RATHER
TO INADEQUATE DISTRIBUTION
OF RESOURCES.
FEEBLE ATTEMPTS BY MOST
GOVERNMENTS TO DECREASE
HUNGER HAVE ENDED IN
MEDIOCRE MEASURES DESIGNED
TO WIN OVER THE LEGITIMACY
OF THEIR PEOPLE.
NUMEROUS SMALL VICTORIES
IN DIFFERENT CORNERS
OF THE WORLD HAVE
DEMONSTRATED THAT
BY EXECUTING RELATIVELY
SIMPLE MEASURES
IMPORTANT ADVANCES
CAN BE MADE.
AND IT CAN BE DONE
BY JUST PROTECTING
SMALL FARMERS OR
CATTLE RANCHERS,
BY DRASTICALLY
IMPROVING MATERNAL LACTATION,
AND ACCESS TO COMPETENT
HEALTH COVERAGE.
HOWEVER, BOTH IN DEVELOPED
AND IN THIRD WORLD NATIONS,
IT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE
THESE ARE GENUINE
GOVERNMENT CONCERNS.
IT IS NOT TRUE THAT THERE
ISN'T ENOUGH ARABLE LAND.
FOR MANY REASONS, LESS
THAN HALF OF ARABLE LAND
IS USED FOR
AGRICULTURE.
MOST OF THE LAND THAT
IS USED FOR CROPS
IS DEDICATED
ENTIRELY TO EXPORT
OR TO THE PRODUCTION
OF FOOD FOR ANIMALS.
TODAY A LARGE PART OF
FOOD GROWN IN THIRD
WORLD COUNTRIES IS
CONSUMED BY ANIMALS.
IN MANY OF THESE COUNTRIES
MORE THAN A THIRD
OF ALL GRAIN IS
GROWN FOR CATTLE.
THESE ANIMALS IN
TURN ARE CONSUMED
IN DEVELOPED NATIONS.
THE RESULT IS THAT THE
MOST AFFLUENT HAVE A DIET
RICH IN ANIMAL PROTEIN
WHILE THE POOREST
ARE LEFT WITH VERY
LITTLE FARMING LAND
TO FEED THEIR
OWN FAMILIES.
AND MANY OF THE AVAILABLE
FARMLANDS OFTEN BELONG TO
SPECIAL INTERESTS, THUS
WORSENING THE PLIGHT
OF LOCAL FARMERS.
THEREFORE THE PROBLEM OF
HUNGER HAS A LOT TO DO
WITH THE WAYS IN WHICH
ARABLE LAND IS USED.
THIS UNEQUAL DISTRIBUTION
LEAVES LOCAL FARMERS
AT A LOSS AND IS ONE OF
THE MAIN REASONS FOR THE
SCARCITY OF FOOD IN MANY
AREAS OF THE WORLD.
AFTER WORLD WAR II THE
AMOUNT OF GRAZING LANDS
AND HEADS OF CATTLE
DOUBLED IN SOUTH AMERICA.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE
CONSUMPTION OF BEEF
BY LOCAL CITIZENS
DIMINISHED.
THE PRODUCTION OF BEEF WAS
EXPORTED TO NORTH AMERICAN
AND EUROPEAN MARKETS.
IN BRAZIL DURING THE
SIXTIES AND SEVENTIES
THOUSANDS OF HECTARES OF
AMAZONIAN RAIN FOREST
WERE DESTROYED TO MAKE
ROOM FOR CATTLE RANCHERS.
IN COLUMBIA
AND PERU
A SIMILAR
PHENOMENON OCCURRED.
THE MAIN REASON FOR THIS
GROWTH WAS THE INCREASE
IN DEMAND FOR HAMBURGER
MEAT BY FAST FOOD CHAINS.
THE PROBLEM OF
OBESITY IS AN EPIDEMIC
AND A THREAT TO
DEVELOPING NATIONS.
THE CULTURE OF CONSUMERISM
IN FIRST WORLD NATIONS
AND THE ABUNDANCE
OF AVAILABLE FOOD
DROWN THESE POPULATIONS
IN THEIR OWN ABUSES
SO MUCH SO THAT IN
COUNTRIES SUCH AS
THE UNITED STATES OBESITY
HAS SURPASSED SMOKING
AS THE MAIN CAUSE OF
PREVENTABLE DEATHS.
THE NUMBER OF OBESE
PERSONS HAS DOUBLED
IN THE LAST THIRTY YEARS
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.
IN DEVELOPED NATIONS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ARE
DESTINED EACH YEAR TO
OFFSET THE EXTENSIVE ARRAY
OF OVEREATING
RELATED DISEASES.
THE QUALITY OF THE FOOD WE
EAT IS INCREASINGLY WORSE.
WHAT IS THE FAVORITE
VEGETABLE OF AMERICANS?
FRENCH FRIES.
AND THE MOST WIDELY
CONSUMED GRAIN?
PROCESSED WHEAT IN
THE SHAPE OF PASTA
OR HAMBURGER BUNS.
THUS IT IS UNDERSTANDABLE
THAT FAST FOOD CONSTITUTES
THE BASIS OF THE
MODERN FOOD PYRAMID.
BUT THE PROBLEM IS NOT
ONLY LOW NUTRITION LEVELS
AND THE EXCESSIVE CALORIC
CONTENT OF FAST FOOD.
THE SIZE OF PORTIONS
MOST PEOPLE EAT
HAS NOTABLY INCREASED.
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
SEEM TO BE ENGAGED
IN AN EATING CONTEST.
FOR EXAMPLE, A TYPICAL
BURGER KING HAMBURGER
WHICH HALF A CENTURY
AGO HAD 200 CALORIES
NOW HAS ALMOST
400 CALORIES.
A SIDE OF FRENCH FRIES
AT MACDONALD'S NOW HAS
MORE THAN THREE TIMES
AS MANY CALORIES.
AS STRANGE AS IT MAY SEEM,
POST INDUSTRIAL SOCIETIES
HAVE FOMENTED SITUATIONS
WHICH ENDANGER THE HEALTH
OF THEIR CITIZENS.
STRESSFUL WORKING
CONDITIONS HAVE MADE
FAST FOOD RESTAURANTS
COMFORTABLE BUT GREASY
SUBSTITUTES FOR
HOMEMADE MEALS.
A MACDONALD'S HAPPY MEAL
CONTAINS HALF OF THE DAILY
CALORIES A HEALTHY ADULT
NEEDS, BUT MUCH LESS
THAN HALF OF THE
NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
IN COMPARISON WITH HEALTHY
MEALS WHICH AREN'T EASY TO
OBTAIN AND ARE EXPENSIVE
AND SCARCELY PROMOTED,
FAST FOOD ITEMS ARE BETTER
ADVERTISED, CHEAPER,
AND ARE DESIGNED TO
PLEASE MORE TASTEBUDS.
ALTHOUGH THE UNITED STATES
HAS THE MOST OBESE PEOPLE,
THIS IS REALLY A WORLDWIDE
PROBLEM ESPECIALLY IN
RECENTLY INDUSTRIALIZED
COUNTRIES SUCH AS MEXICO,
SOUTH AFRICA, TUNISIA,
TURKEY, IRAN AND THAILAND.
IN FACT, CITIZENS OF
LESS DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
ARE ALSO GAINING WEIGHT
EVEN IF THE AVAILABILITY
OF FOOD IS INFERIOR TO
THAT OF THE UNITED STATES.
THIS REPRESENTS A MENACE
TO THESE COUNTRIES
WHICH IN JUST A FEW YEARS
WILL SURPASS NORTH AMERICA
IN OBESITY AND WEIGHT
RELATED DISEASES.
A REDUCTION IN
PHYSICAL EFFORT
DUE MAINLY TO THE
TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTION
COMPOUNDED WITH
NUTRITIONAL EXCESSES
ARE AMONG THE MAIN CAUSES
OF THIS WORLDWIDE EPIDEMIC.
BUT THERE IS MUCH
INTERCONTINENTAL
CONTRAST AS WELL.
LET'S TAKE A CLOSER
LOOK AT AFRICA.
IN COUNTRIES SUCH AS
ETHIOPIA AND BURKINA FASO
TWO THIRDS OF
THE POPULATION
ARE AFFECTED
BY HUNGER.
YET IN SOUTH
AFRICA AND TUNISIA
OBESITY IS MORE COMMON
THAN MALNUTRITION.
FURTHER TO THE EAST,
AFTER CHINA UNDERTOOK
ITS VAUNTED
COMMERCIAL REVOLUTION,
AND BECAUSE IT HAS THE
HIGHEST PER CAPITA
CHICKEN CONSUMPTION
RATE IN THE WORLD,
FAST FOOD CHAINS SUCH
AS KFC HAVE FLOURISHED.
AND FURTHER TO THE
SOUTH ON THE AUSTRALIAN
CONTINENT, DIETS RICH IN
FAT HAVE MADE AN ALREADY
HEAVYSET POPULATION AMONG
THE FATTEST ON THE PLANET.
IN MANY CASES THE
ACCUMULATION OF FAT
IN THE LIVER CAN
CAUSE CIRRHOSIS.
EXCESS ABDOMINAL FAT
IS DIRECTLY RELATED
TO COLON CANCER.
BEING OVERWEIGHT ALSO
CAUSES A LOSS OF CARTILAGE
IN JOINTS WHICH CAN
LEAD TO ARTHRITIS.
THE RISK OF HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE AND STROKE AS A
RESULT OF THE ACCUMULATION
OF CHOLESTEROL IN ARTERIES
IS YET ANOTHER
COMMON PROBLEM.
MOST OBESE PEOPLE WILL
SUFFER FROM DIABETES
WHICH CAN IN TURN LEAD
TO A LOSS OF EYESIGHT
AND HEMORRHAGING.
THE GREEN REVOLUTION
AS WE KNOW IT
IS SHOWING SYMPTOMS OF
CONCLUDING PREMATURELY.
THIS IS DUE TO THE
IMPOSSIBILITY OF CREATING
ARABLE LAND IN PROTECTED
AREAS, TO THE FACT THAT
THE VARIETIES THAT MADE
THIS REVOLUTION POSSIBLE
ARE REACHING THE LIMITS
OF THEIR PRODUCTIVITY,
AND ABOVE ALL TO THE FACT
THAT THIS EXPANSION IN
PRODUCTIVITY WAS OBTAINED
THANKS TO AN EQUALLY
IMPRESSIVE DEVELOPMENT
IN IRRIGATION METHODS.
IF AVAILABLE
LAND IS SCARCE,
ACCESS TO WATER
IS EVEN MORE SO.
CURRENTLY ALMOST HALF
OF THE WORLD PRODUCTION
OF FOOD COMES FROM FIELDS
THAT ARE IRRIGATED.
WATER LEVELS ARE
DIMINISHING EVERYWHERE,
ESPECIALLY IN AND AROUND
THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA,
INDIA, AND
PARTS OF CHINA.
THE RATE OF CONSUMPTION
IS MUCH HIGHER
THAN THE RATE
OF REPLENISHMENT.
IN THE SHORT TO MID TERM
IT SEEMS THAT HALF OF THE
WORLD'S POPULATION WILL
SUFFER FROM PROBLEMS
DUE TO SCARCE
ACCESS TO WATER.
IT'S AN ILLUSION
TO THINK THAT
IRRIGATION CAN
BE EXPANDED.
A NEW STRATEGY OF FOOD
PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION
IS NEEDED.
A NEW STRATEGY IS
ALSO NEEDED TO ACCESS
ARABLE LAND AND TO
INCREASE THE CAPACITY
TO ACQUIRE
AND PRODUCE FOOD.
EVEN TODAY TOO MANY
PEOPLE ARE TOO POOR
TO BUY
AVAILABLE FOOD.
THEY'RE HUNGRY BECAUSE
THEY DON'T HAVE ANY MONEY,
NOT BECAUSE THERE'S
NO FOOD AVAILABLE.
EVEN SOME OF THE POOREST
COUNTRIES HAVE ENOUGH
RESOURCES FOR ALL OF
THEIR POPULATIONS.
IN FACT, MOST MALNOURISHED
CHILDREN LIVE IN NATIONS
WITH A SURPLUS OF FOOD.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT MOST
OF THE CITIZENS OF THOSE
NATIONS SIMPLY CANNOT PAY
SUCH HIGH PRICES FOR FOOD.
THE SOLUTION TO THE
PROBLEM OF REDUCING HUNGER
IS SUSTAINABLE RURAL AND
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT.
IN SPITE OF THE MEASURES
TAKEN, THE NUMBER OF
HUNGRY PEOPLE IN THE
WORLD IS NOT DIMINISHING
FAST ENOUGH TO REACH THE
MILLENNIUM OBJECTIVES.
IN ORDER TO DO SO, HUNGER
WOULD HAVE TO BE REDUCED
AT A RATE OF 26
MILLION PEOPLE A YEAR.
IN TRUTH, THE REDUCTION
HAS AMOUNTED TO ONLY
SIX MILLION - ONE QUARTER
OF THE STATED GOAL.
TODAY THE PROBLEM IS
NOT THE AMOUNT OF FOOD
BEING PRODUCED -
ALTHOUGH IN THE SHORT
TO MID TERM IT MAY
BECOME JUST THAT -
THE PROJECTED POPULATION
INCREASE COUPLED WITH THE
EROSION OF THE ENVIRONMENT
AND THE LACK OF WATER
MAY LEAD US TO AN
UNPRECEDENTED FOOD CRISIS.
WHAT ARE WE DOING TO
AVOID THIS OUTCOME?
THE PROGRESS OF MODERN
AGRICULTURE IS BASED ON
THE EXPERIENCE ACQUIRED
FROM A CENTURY AND A HALF
OF SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITY.
THE GREEN REVOLUTION IS
PART OF THIS PROCESS.
IT'S BASED ON ITS CAPACITY
TO MODIFY THE ENVIRONMENT
SO THAT THE MOST IDEAL
CONDITIONS FOR AGRICULTURE
AND CATTLE RAISING
CAN BE PUT INTO PLACE.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF
THE CLIMATE IS DRY
IRRIGATION IS USED.
IF THE GROUND
IS NOT FERTILE,
FERTILIZERS
ARE USED.
IF WEED AND PESTS INVADE
CROPS, FIELDS ARE SPRAYED.
IF MORE ENERGY IS NEEDED
TO ROTATE ARABLE FIELDS,
MECHANIZED VEHICLES
AND FOSSIL FUELS
COME INTO PLAY.
THE GREEN REVOLUTION WAS
BASED ON PRECISELY THAT.
THERE ARE MANY BENEFITS
BUT THERE IS ALSO
MUCH HARM DONE TO
THE ENVIRONMENT.
THE NEXT STEP IS THE
USE OF BIOTECHNOLOGY -
AGRICULTURAL APPLICATIONS
OF GENETIC ENGINEERING.
IT IS THE NEW
GREEN REVOLUTION.
AN ALTERNATIVE WHICH IS
FRAUGHT WITH BOTH MORAL
ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITY
FOR THE FUTURE.
HOW IS GENETIC ENGINEERING
APPLIED TO NUTRITION?
ALL LIVING BEINGS CONTAIN
GENETIC INFORMATION
IN THEIR CHROMOSOMES.
CHROMOSOMES ARE MADE
UP OF STRANDS OF DNA
WHICH ARE
FORMED BY GENES.
EACH GENE IS MADE UP OF
A NUMBER OF THESE UNITS.
GENES DETERMINE, BY WAY
OF THEIR COMPLEX CODE,
THE CHARACTERISTICS
OF EACH ORGANISM.
HUMAN BEINGS HAVE
A CERTAIN GENOME
WHILE LETTUCE, FOR
EXAMPLE, HAS ANOTHER.
BY USING GENETIC
ENGINEERING TECHNIQUES
A GENE FROM ONE ORGANISM MAY
BE INTRODUCED INTO ANOTHER.
FOR EXAMPLE, IT IS
POSSIBLE TO INTRODUCE
A SCORPION GENE
INTO LETTUCE.
THIS IS KNOWN AS
GENETIC MANIPULATION.
THUS THE PHYSIOLOGICAL
CHARACTERISTICS
OF AN ORGANISM
CAN BE ALTERED.
IT WOULD BE POSSIBLE,
FOR INSTANCE,
TO MAKE A CERTAIN LETTUCE
THAT HAS BEEN IMPLANTED
WITH A SCORPION GENE
PRODUCE SCORPION VENOM.
THE NEW ORGANISM IS KNOWN
AS A GENETICALLY MODIFIED
ORGANISM, OR MORE COMMONLY
AS A TRANSGENIC ORGANISM.
ARE TRANSGENIC
FOODS GOOD OR BAD?
IS THE USE OF
BIOTECHNOLOGY IN
AGRICULTURE A GOOD
OR A BAD IDEA?
IT ISN'T EASY TO
ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS,
BUT WE MUST TRY
TO DO SO BECAUSE
THE FUTURE OF OUR NUTRITION
DEPENDS ON THESE ANSWERS.
WOULD PLANTS THAT RESIST
THE COLD AND DROUGHT
BE USEFUL IF THEIR
YIELD WERE IMPROVED?
WOULD PLANTS THAT REQUIRE
LESS HERBICIDES, WATER,
AND ENERGY HELP STOP
THE DETERIORATION
OF THE ENVIRONMENT?
OBVIOUSLY, YES.
THAT IS PRECISELY
THE "RAISON D'ETRE"
OF BIOTECHNOLOGY.
HOWEVER, WHAT WOULD HAPPEN
IF THE DEVELOPMENT AND
DISTRIBUTION OF SAID
TECHNOLOGY WERE IN THE
HANDS OF A HALF DOZEN
PRIVATE BUSINESSES THAT
ARE MORE CONCERNED WITH
COMMERCIAL STRATEGIES
THAN WITH THE INTERESTS
OF THE POPULATION?
THAT IS EXACTLY
WHAT IS OCCURRING.
THE BUSINESS OF GENETIC
ENGINEERING IS IN
THE HANDS OF LARGE
AGRO-CHEMICAL
AND PHARMACEUTICAL
MULTINATIONALS.
TRANSGENIC FOODS ARE
ALREADY ON OUR TABLES.
THEY'RE A PART OF
ECONOMIC GLOBALIZATION.
BUT ARE WE AWARE
OF THEIR RISKS?
THE EXTENSIVE USE
OF TRANSGENIC CROPS
STIMULATES THE USE
OF HERBICIDES WHICH
CONTAMINATE THE WATER WE
DEPEND ON AND ARABLE LAND.
THESE HERBICIDES ARE ALSO
A DANGER TO PUBLIC HEALTH
BECAUSE OF
THEIR TOXICITY.
ANOTHER REASON TO DOUBT
THE BENEFITS OF TRANSGENIC
FOODS IS THAT THE ECONOMIC
POLICIES THAT SPONSOR THE
PRODUCTION OF GENETICALLY
ALTERED FOOD HAS HAD
GRAVE CONSEQUENCES ON
THE LIVES OF FARMERS.
ONE OF THE BASES OF THIS
BUSINESS IS THE SO-CALLED
"TERMINATOR" GENE.
THIS GENE RENDERS SEEDS
INFERTILE AND FORCES
FARMERS TO BUY THE
ORIGINAL SEEDS EVERY YEAR
WHICH ENABLES CORPORATIONS
TO EASILY CONTROL
AGRICULTURE AND
WORLD FOOD MARKETS.
THERE ARE NO ADVANTAGES
TO THIS EXCEPT
FOR AGRO-INDUSTRIAL
MULTINATIONALS.
TRANSGENIC SEEDS ARE
MORE EXPENSIVE THAN
CONVENTIONAL SEEDS AND
BECAUSE THEY ARE PATENTED
FARMERS CANNOT
USE THE NEW SEEDS
TO PLANT THEM FOR
THE NEXT SEASON.
COMPANIES DERIVE HUGE
PROFITS FROM EXERTING
CONTROL OVER THE
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
OF THE GENETIC
CHARACTERISTICS
OF THE PRINCIPLE
CROPS IN THE WORLD
WHILE THE POOREST
FARMERS ON THE PLANET
BECOME INCREASINGLY
POORER.
SO IF TRANSGENIC FOODS
CAUSE SO MANY PROBLEMS,
WHY DO WESTERN GOVERNMENTS
SPONSOR THEIR USE?
THE ANSWER LIES IN
THE GREAT GEOPOLITICAL
ECONOMIC GAIN.
LARGE MULTINATIONALS
INTERESTED IN
TRANSGENIC FOODS
WIELD ENORMOUS POWER
AND THAT ECONOMIC POWER
ENABLES THEM TO WIELD
ALMOST UNLIMITED
POLITICAL POWER.
IS THERE A PLACE
FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY
IN THE AREA OF
FOOD PRODUCTION?
OF COURSE THERE IS.
NOT ONLY MUST WE MAKE USE
OF IT, BUT TO A LARGE
DEGREE THE CHANCES OF
ERADICATING WORLD HUNGER
DEPEND ON AN APPROPRIATE USE
OF THESE NEW TECHNOLOGIES.
BUT THE SUCCESS
OF THIS CHALLENGE
DEPENDS ON THE
OBJECTIVES WE ESTABLISH.
WHAT ARE
THE OBJECTIVES?
TO INCREASE PROFIT
MARGINS OF LARGE
COMMERCIAL INTERESTS OR
TO GUARANTEE LONG TERM
SUSTAINABLE FOOD AND
ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT?
WE MUST DEFINE
OUR PRIORITIES.
THERE IS ROOM FOR
BIOTECHNOLOGICAL METHODS
THAT CREATE GENETICALLY
NEW CROPS THAT CAN
COMPLEMENT THOSE WE
ALREADY CONSUME.
THERE IS ROOM FOR THE
SORT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
THAT PRODUCES MORE
RESISTANT PLANTS
DURING DROUGHTS AND
ONSLAUGHTS OF PESTS
AND THAT ARE LESS
DEPENDENT ON AGROCHEMICALS;
THE TYPE OF AGRICULTURAL
PLANNING THAT IS COMPATIBLE
WITH ECOLOGICALLY
SUSTAINABLE IDEALS
BUT THAT NEVER LOSES
SIGHT OF THE NEED TO FEED
SEVEN BILLION MOUTHS
IN A COUPLE OF DECADES.
THERE IS ALSO ROOM
FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY
THAT IS FINANCED
BY GOVERNMENTS
AND IS AT THE SERVICE
OF THE POOREST -
BIOTECHNOLOGY AT THE
SERVICE OF THE PEOPLE.
MALNUTRITION HAS BEEN
A PLIGHT ON HUMANITY
SINCE THE BEGINNING
OF ITS HISTORY.
CIVILIZATION BEGAN WITH
THE DOMESTICATION OF
PLANTS AND ANIMALS -
INVENTIONS THAT ALLOWED
HUMANS TO FEED THEMSELVES
WITHOUT HAVING TO
SPEND ALL THEIR
ENERGIES IN DOING SO.
ALSO SINCE THE DAWN OF
MAN AND IN DIFFERENT
REGIONS OF THE WORLD
AND MOMENTS IN HISTORY,
THE MASTERY OF
ONE SMALL GROUP
OVER THE REST HAS
BEEN A CONSTANT THAT
EXPLAINS THE OVER
ABUNDANCE OF SOME
AT THE EXPENSE OF
THE MISERY OF MANY.
BUT ONLY NOW DOES MAN
HAVE THE ABILITY TO FEED
THE ENTIRE POPULATION
OF THE WORLD
WITHOUT RUINING
THE ENVIRONMENT.
WE HAVE THE MEANS,
WHAT WE DO NOT HAVE
IS THE POLITICAL WILL.
THE GREEN REVOLUTION WITH
ALL ITS IMPERFECTIONS
SHOWED THE WAY.
THE MILLENNIUM OBJECTIVES
ARE A LOFTY GOAL
THAT WE CANNOT
SEEM TO ACHIEVE.
IN THE AREA
OF FOOD SUPPLY
IT IS NECESSARY TO
FIND A NEW PARADIGM,
NEW PRODUCTION AND
CONSUMPTION HABITS.
WE NEED FOOD THAT IS
BASED LESS ON FATS
AND RICHER IN LEGUMES,
FRUIT AND VEGETABLES
AS WELL AS HEALTHY
PROTEINS THAT
REQUIRE LESS ENERGY
TO BE PRODUCED.
WE MUST INCREASE OUR
DEPENDENCE ON MORE
ENERGETICALLY
SOUND ANIMALS
VIS A VIS STANDARD
FATTY CATTLE.
WE MUST PROMOTE
RESPONSIBLE BIOTECHNOLOGY
METHODS AND DEPEND LESS
ON FOSSIL FUELS AND WATER
WHEN PRODUCING
OUR FOOD SOURCES.
MALNUTRITION IS NOT
ONLY A CONSEQUENCE
BUT ONE OF THE CAUSES
OF UNDERDEVELOPMENT.
WHEN ALL IS
SAID AND DONE,
THIS UNDERDEVELOPMENT
WILL THREATEN THE PATH
TO COMMON WELFARE
AND SECURITY,
MAKING THESE LOFTY
GOALS AVAILABLE ONLY TO
A SELECT FEW AND ALWAYS
SUBJECT TO VIOLENT CRISES.
A PARENT THAT GOES TO BED
ON AN EMPTY STOMACH AND AN
EVEN EMPTIER SOUL FOR NOT
BRINGING FOOD TO THE TABLE
TO FEED HIS FAMILY CANNOT
FEEL SECURE AND BE AT PEACE.
BUT HIS NEIGHBOR
WITH A FULL STOMACH
CANNOT FEEL SATISFIED
EITHER IF HE KNOWS
THAT THERE IS HUNGER
JUST NEXT DOOR.
IN A GLOBAL WORLD
THE INJUSTICE OF AN
UNBALANCED ACCESS TO FOOD
IS EVERYONE'S PROBLEM.